OVERDOING IT

GLYEB GAVRILOVITCH SMIRNOV, a land surveyor, arrived at the station of
Gnilushki. He had another twenty or thirty miles to drive before he
would reach the estate which he had been summoned to survey. (If the
driver were not drunk and the horses were not bad, it would hardly be
twenty miles, but if the driver had had a drop and his steeds were worn
out it would mount up to a good forty.)

“Tell me, please, where can I get post-horses here?” the surveyor asked
of the station gendarme.

“What? Post-horses? There’s no finding a decent dog for seventy miles
round, let alone post-horses. . . . But where do you want to go?”

“To Dyevkino, General Hohotov’s estate.”

“Well,” yawned the gendarme, “go outside the station, there are
sometimes peasants in the yard there, they will take passengers.”

The surveyor heaved a sigh and made his way out of the station.

There, after prolonged enquiries, conversations, and hesitations, he
found a very sturdy, sullen-looking pock-marked peasant, wearing a
tattered grey smock and bark-shoes.

“You have got a queer sort of cart!” said the surveyor, frowning as he
clambered into the cart. “There is no making out which is the back and
which is the front.”

“What is there to make out? Where the horse’s tail is, there’s the
front, and where your honour’s sitting, there’s the back.”

The little mare was young, but thin, with legs planted wide apart and
frayed ears. When the driver stood up and lashed her with a whip made of
cord, she merely shook her head; when he swore at her and lashed her
once more, the cart squeaked and shivered as though in a fever. After
the third lash the cart gave a lurch, after the fourth, it moved
forward.

“Are we going to drive like this all the way?” asked the surveyor,
violently jolted and marvelling at the capacity of Russian drivers for
combining a slow tortoise-like pace with a jolting that turns the soul
inside out.

“We shall ge-et there!” the peasant reassured him. “The mare is young
and frisky. . . . Only let her get running and then there is no stopping
her. . . . No-ow, cur-sed brute!”

It was dusk by the time the cart drove out of the station. On the
surveyor’s right hand stretched a dark frozen plain, endless and
boundless. If you drove over it you would certainly get to the other
side of beyond. On the horizon, where it vanished and melted into the
sky, there was the languid glow of a cold autumn sunset. . . . On the
left of the road, mounds of some sort, that might be last year’s stacks
or might be a village, rose up in the gathering darkness. The surveyor
could not see what was in front as his whole field of vision on that
side was covered by the broad clumsy back of the driver. The air was
still, but it was cold and frosty.

“What a wilderness it is here,” thought the surveyor, trying to cover
his ears with the collar of his overcoat. “Neither post nor paddock. If,
by ill-luck, one were attacked and robbed no one would hear you,
whatever uproar you made. . . . And the driver is not one you could
depend on. . . . Ugh, what a huge back! A child of nature like that has
only to move a finger and it would be all up with one! And his ugly face
is suspicious and brutal-looking.”

“Hey, my good man!” said the surveyor, “What is your name?”

“Mine? Klim.”

“Well, Klim, what is it like in your parts here? Not dangerous? Any
robbers on the road?”

“It is all right, the Lord has spared us. . . . Who should go robbing on
the road?”

“It’s a good thing there are no robbers. But to be ready for anything I
have got three revolvers with me,” said the surveyor untruthfully. “And
it doesn’t do to trifle with a revolver, you know. One can manage a
dozen robbers. . . .”

It had become quite dark. The cart suddenly began creaking, squeaking,
shaking, and, as though unwillingly, turned sharply to the left.

“Where is he taking me to?” the surveyor wondered. “He has been driving
straight and now all at once to the left. I shouldn’t wonder if he’ll
take me, the rascal, to some den of thieves . . . and. . . . Things like
that do happen.”

“I say,” he said, addressing the driver, “so you tell me it’s not
dangerous here? That’s a pity. . . I like a fight with robbers. . . . I
am thin and sickly-looking, but I have the strength of a bull . . . .
Once three robbers attacked me and what do you think? I gave one such a
dressing that. . . that he gave up his soul to God, you understand, and
the other two were sent to penal servitude in Siberia. And where I got
the strength I can’t say. . . . One grips a strapping fellow of your
sort with one hand and . . . wipes him out.”

Klim looked round at the surveyor, wrinkled up his whole face, and
lashed his horse.

“Yes . . .” the surveyor went on. “God forbid anyone should tackle me.
The robber would have his bones broken, and, what’s more, he would have
to answer for it in the police court too. . . . I know all the judges
and the police captains, I am a man in the Government, a man of
importance. Here I am travelling and the authorities know . . . they
keep a regular watch over me to see no one does me a mischief. There are
policemen and village constables stuck behind bushes all along the road.
. . . Sto . . . sto . . . . stop!” the surveyor bawled suddenly. “Where
have you got to? Where are you taking me to?”

“Why, don’t you see? It’s a forest!”

“It certainly is a forest,” thought the surveyor. “I was frightened! But
it won’t do to betray my feelings. . . . He has noticed already that I
am in a funk. Why is it he has taken to looking round at me so often? He
is plotting something for certain. . . . At first he drove like a snail
and now how he is dashing along!”

“I say, Klim, why are you making the horse go like that?”

“I am not making her go. She is racing along of herself. . . . Once she
gets into a run there is no means of stopping her. It’s no pleasure to
her that her legs are like that.”

“You are lying, my man, I see that you are lying. Only I advise you not
to drive so fast. Hold your horse in a bit. . . . Do you hear? Hold her
in!”

“What for?”

“Why . . . why, because four comrades were to drive after me from the
station. We must let them catch us up. . . . They promised to overtake
us in this forest. It will be more cheerful in their company. . . . They
are a strong, sturdy set of fellows. . . . And each of them has got a
pistol. Why do you keep looking round and fidgeting as though you were
sitting on thorns? eh? I, my good fellow, er . . . my good fellow . . .
there is no need to look around at me . . . there is nothing interesting
about me. . . . Except perhaps the revolvers. Well, if you like I will
take them out and show you. . . .”

The surveyor made a pretence of feeling in his pockets and at that
moment something happened which he could not have expected with all his
cowardice. Klim suddenly rolled off the cart and ran as fast as he could
go into the forest.

“Help!” he roared. “Help! Take the horse and the cart, you devil, only
don’t take my life. Help!”

There was the sound of footsteps hurriedly retreating, of twigs
snapping—and all was still. . . . The surveyor had not expected such a
dÃ©nouement. He first stopped the horse and then settled himself more
comfortably in the cart and fell to thinking.

“He has run off . . . he was scared, the fool. Well, what’s to be done
now? I can’t go on alone because I don’t know the way; besides they may
think I have stolen his horse. . . . What’s to be done?”

“Klim! Klim,” he cried.

“Klim,” answered the echo.

At the thought that he would have to sit through the whole night in the
cold and dark forest and hear nothing but the wolves, the echo, and the
snorting of the scraggy mare, the surveyor began to have twinges down
his spine as though it were being rasped with a cold file.

“Klimushka,” he shouted. “Dear fellow! Where are you, Klimushka?”

For two hours the surveyor shouted, and it was only after he was quite
husky and had resigned himself to spending the night in the forest that
a faint breeze wafted the sound of a moan to him.

“Klim, is it you, dear fellow? Let us go on.”

“You’ll mu-ur-der me!”

“But I was joking, my dear man! I swear to God I was joking! As though I
had revolvers! I told a lie because I was frightened. For goodness sake
let us go on, I am freezing!”

Klim, probably reflecting that a real robber would have vanished long
ago with the horse and cart, came out of the forest and went
hesitatingly up to his passenger.

“Well, what were you frightened of, stupid? I . . . I was joking and you
were frightened. Get in!”

“God be with you, sir,” Klim muttered as he clambered into the cart, “if
I had known I wouldn’t have taken you for a hundred roubles. I almost
died of fright. . . .”

Klim lashed at the little mare. The cart swayed. Klim lashed once more
and the cart gave a lurch. After the fourth stroke of the whip when the
cart moved forward, the surveyor hid his ears in his collar and sank
into thought.

The road and Klim no longer seemed dangerous to him.
